README.md, before:


# 🏥 **Hospital Management System — Full Stack Django Application**

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/responsive.png" 
       alt="Hospital Management System Screenshot" width="900">
</p>

A comprehensive **Hospital Management System** built with **Django**, **Stripe Payments**, **Bootstrap**, **JavaScript**, and a **relational database** (SQLite locally, PostgreSQL on Heroku).
This platform enables **Admins**, **Doctors**, and **Patients** to securely manage appointments, records, billing, discharge summaries, and online payments.

---

# 📖 **Table of Contents**

1. [📌 Project Overview](#-project-overview)
2. [👤 User Stories](#-user-stories)
3. [🎨 UX / UI Design](#-ux--ui-design)
4. [🛠 Technologies Used](#-technologies-used)
5. [📂 System Architecture](#-system-architecture)
6. [🗄 Data Models](#-data-models)
7. [🔐 Authentication & Authorization](#-authentication--authorization)
8. [📅 App Features](#-app-features)
9. [💳 Stripe Payment Integration](#-stripe-payment-integration)
10. [🧪 Validation, Testing & Lighthouse](#-validation-testing--lighthouse)
11. [🚀 Deployment Guide (Heroku)](#-deployment-guide-heroku)
12. [📁 File Structure](#-file-structure)
13. [🙏 Credits & Attribution](#-credits--attribution)
14. [📜 License](#-license)

---

# 📌 **Project Overview**

This **Hospital Management System** modernizes hospital operations with:

✔ Multi-role access: Admin, Doctor, Patient
✔ Appointment booking + management
✔ Doctor & patient onboarding
✔ Discharge summary & billing generator
✔ Stripe-powered online payment system
✔ Mobile-first responsive UI
✔ Django ORM + secure authentication
✔ Comprehensive validations & Lighthouse testing

---

# 👤 **User Stories**

Below are the full user stories built into this system.
Each story explains the **goal**, the **action**, and the **value delivered** to the user.

---

# 🧑‍⚕️ **Admin User Stories**

As an **Admin**, I want to:

---

### 🟢 **1. Register or Approve Doctors & Patients**

So that only trusted and verified users gain access to the hospital system.

**I should be able to:**

* View all pending registration requests
* Approve, reject, or delete accounts
* Ensure secure access to sensitive data
* See account status updates instantly

---

### 📝 **2. Add & Manage Appointments**

To maintain an organized schedule and prevent double-booking.

**This includes:**

* Creating new appointments
* Approving or denying appointment requests
* Rescheduling or cancelling bookings
* Viewing all appointments in date order

---

### 🔍 **3. View & Update Doctor/Patient Records**

So that hospital data remains accurate and up to date.

**I should be able to:**

* Search for users
* Edit or delete records
* Update profile information
* View medical or administrative details

---

### 🧾 **4. Generate Bills & Discharge Summaries**

To ensure smooth billing workflows and accurate documentation.

**I can:**

* Generate final invoices
* Add doctor fees, room charges, medicine fees
* Download discharge summaries
* Store records for future reference

---

### 📊 **5. Access the Admin Dashboard**

So that I can monitor overall hospital activity.

**Dashboard shows:**

* Pending approvals
* Total appointments
* Total patients and doctors
* Latest system activity

---

### 🔒 **6. Enforce Role-Based Authentication**

To ensure that restricted pages are only accessed by authorized roles.

---

# 🩺 **Doctor User Stories**

As a **Doctor**, I want to:

---

### 📅 **1. View My Appointments**

To quickly understand the daily schedule and patient list.

**I can:**

* View appointments assigned to me
* Sort by date and time
* Check patient names, symptoms, and notes

---

### 👨‍⚕️ **2. Access Assigned Patients**

To prepare for consultations.

**I can:**

* View patient details and medical history
* Access submitted symptoms and prior treatments
* See profile images for easy identification

---

### 💊 **3. Issue Prescriptions**

To provide correct treatment.

**I can:**

* Add medication names
* Add dosage & timings
* Create downloadable notes for patients

---

### 🗂 **4. View Past Discharge Summaries**

To understand patient history for future visits.

---

### 🛡 **5. Access Only My Patients**

To maintain confidentiality and privacy.

---

# 🧑‍🦽 **Patient User Stories**

As a **Patient**, I want to:

---

### 🧾 **1. Register Easily**

So that I can securely access the system.

**I provide:**

* Basic personal details
* Contact information
* Symptoms
* Optional profile photo

---

### 📅 **2. Book Appointments**

To receive timely medical assistance.

**I can:**

* Choose a doctor
* Select appointment date
* Get confirmation instantly

---

### 🔎 **3. View Appointment History**

To keep track of all past and upcoming medical visits.

---

### 📄 **4. View Billing & Discharge Information**

To download and review all medical charges.

---

### 💬 **5. Send Feedback / Contact Form**

To reach out to the hospital for help or suggestions.


---

# 🎨 **UX / UI Design**

### UX Goals

✔ Accessible
✔ Clean & modern
✔ Mobile responsive
✔ Easy navigation

---

## 🖼 **Wireframes (GitHub Hosted)**

### 🖥 Desktop

![Desktop Wireframe](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/desktop.png)

### 📱 Tablet

![Tablet Wireframe](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/tablet.png)

### 📲 Mobile

![Mobile Wireframe](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/mobile.png)

---

# 🛠 **Technologies Used**

### **Frontend**

* HTML5
* CSS3 / Bootstrap
* JavaScript

### **Backend**

* Django
* Python
* Django ModelForms
* Django ORM

### **Database**

* SQLite (Local)
* PostgreSQL (Heroku)

### **Deployment**

* Heroku
* GitHub
* WhiteNoise
* Gunicorn

---

# 📂 **System Architecture**

```
hospital_management/
│
├── hospital/         # Main logic & models
├── payments/         # Stripe handling
├── static/           # CSS, JS, images
├── templates/        # HTML templates
└── hospitalmanagement/ # Settings + URLs
```

---

# 🗄 **Data Models**

Includes:

✔ Doctor
✔ Patient
✔ Appointment
✔ DischargeDetails
✔ Payment (Stripe)

With relationships:

* One-to-One: User ↔ Doctor, User ↔ Patient
* Many-to-One: Patient → Appointments
* One-to-Many: Patient → Discharge Summaries

## Full Data Schema (Tables + Fields)

Doctor
- user_id (OneToOne -> auth_user)
- department, mobile, address, profile_pic, status, created_at

Patient
- user_id (OneToOne -> auth_user)
- address, mobile, symptoms, profile_pic, assignedDoctorId (FK -> Doctor), status, created_at

Appointment
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- doctor_id (FK -> Doctor)
- date_time, description, status, created_at
- created_by_id, updated_by_id (FK -> auth_user)

DischargeDetails
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- doctor_id (FK -> Doctor, nullable)
- admission_date, discharge_date, summary
- room_charge, doctor_fee, medicine_cost, other_charge, total, created_at

Invoice
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- issued_date, amount, paid, created_at, created_by_id (FK -> auth_user)

Payment
- user_id (FK -> auth_user)
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- discharge_id (FK -> DischargeDetails, nullable)
- amount, currency, stripe_session_id, stripe_payment_intent, status, created_at

Prescription
- appointment_id (OneToOne -> Appointment)
- date_issued, medications, instructions, created_at, created_by_id (FK -> auth_user)

Feedback
- appointment_id (FK -> Appointment)
- rating, comments, submitted_at

## Text ERD (Relationships)

```
User 1--1 Doctor
User 1--1 Patient
Patient 1--* Appointment *--1 Doctor
Appointment 1--1 Prescription
Appointment 1--* Feedback
Patient 1--* DischargeDetails
DischargeDetails 1--* Payment
User 1--* Payment
Patient 1--* Invoice
```

---

# 🔐 **Authentication & Authorization**

✔ Django Auth
✔ Role-based permissions
✔ Secure session management
✔ Custom decorators for access control

---

# 📅 **App Features Overview**

### **Admin**

* Approve users
* Manage appointments
* Billing + discharge

### **Doctor**

* View appointments
* Patient access
* Add diagnosis

### **Patient**

* Book appointments
* Track visit history
* Download reports

---

# 💳 **Stripe Payment Integration**

Includes:

✔ Stripe Checkout
✔ Secure redirection
✔ Test mode supported
✔ Payment logs stored in DB

Environment vars:

```
STRIPE_PUBLISHABLE_KEY=pk_test_...
STRIPE_SECRET_KEY=sk_test_...
```

---

# 🧪 **Validation, Testing & Lighthouse**

Below is the full validation section you requested, including images stored in GitHub.

---

## ✅ **Validation Summary Table**

| Validation Type   | Tool                 | Status   | Notes                             |
| ----------------- | -------------------- | -------- | --------------------------------- |
| HTML              | W3C Validator        | ✔ Passed | Templates validated               |
| CSS               | Jigsaw CSS Validator | ✔ Passed | Bootstrap vendor warnings ignored |
| JS                | JSHint / ESLint      | ✔ Passed | ES6 validated with config         |
| Python            | pycodestyle / flake8 | ✔ Passed | Long lines noted but non-breaking |
| Django Deployment | `check --deploy`     | ✔ Passed | Safe                              |

---

## 🖼 **Validation Screenshots**

### ✅ HTML Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/html_validate.png" width="700">

### 🎨 CSS Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/css_valid.png" width="700">

### 🟨 JavaScript Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/js_valid.png" width="700">

### 🐍 Python (PEP8) Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/python_PEP8_valid.png" width="700">


---

## 📱 **Responsiveness Testing**

| Device Type | Examples         | Result |
| ----------- | ---------------- | ------ |
| Mobile      | iPhone, Pixel    | ✔ Good |
| Tablet      | iPad Mini        | ✔ Good |
| Laptop      | MacBook, Surface | ✔ Good |
| Desktop     | FHD/4K           | ✔ Good |

---

## 🌐 **Browser Compatibility Testing**

| Browser | Appearance | Functionality | Responsive |
| ------- | ---------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Chrome  | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |
| Safari  | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |
| Firefox | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |
| Edge    | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |

---

## 🧪 **Manual Testing Matrix**

| Test Case           | Expected       | Actual  | Status |
| ------------------- | -------------- | ------- | ------ |
| Login               | Redirect       | Works   | ✔      |
| Invalid Login       | Error          | Correct | ✔      |
| Booking Appointment | Saves          | Works   | ✔      |
| Approve Doctor      | Status updates | Works   | ✔      |
| Discharge Bill      | PDF            | Works   | ✔      |
| Stripe Payment      | Works          | Works   | ✔      |

---

## 🔦 **Lighthouse Scores**

| Metric         | Mobile | Desktop |
| -------------- | ------ | ------- |
| Performance    | ⭐⭐⭐⭐   | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐   |
| Accessibility  | ⭐⭐⭐⭐   | ⭐⭐⭐⭐    |
| Best Practices | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐  | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐   |
| SEO            | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐  | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐   |

### Screenshots

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/lighthouse_desk.jpg" width="700">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/lighthouse_mob.jpg" width="700">

---

# 🐞 Debugging & Issue Resolution

This project went through several rounds of debugging and validation to ensure that the **HTML**, **CSS**, **JavaScript**, and **Python** code are clean, standards-compliant, and production-ready.  
Below is a summary of the main issues encountered and how they were fixed.

---

## 1️⃣ HTML Validation (W3C Nu Validator)

**Tool:** W3C HTML Validator (https://validator.w3.org/)  
**Screenshot:**  
![HTML Validation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/html_validate.png)

### Initial Issues

| Problem | Details |
| ------ | ------- |
| Trailing slash on void elements | Validator reported that a `<link>` tag had a trailing `/` and highlighted that this can cause issues with unquoted attributes. |
| `<style>` inside `<main>` | A `<style>` tag had been placed inside a `<main>` element, causing the error: **"Element `style` not allowed as child of element `main` in this context."** |

### Fixes Applied

- Removed unnecessary trailing `/` from affected void elements where required.
- Moved all inline `<style>` blocks from page content sections (e.g. inside `<main>`) into the base templates’ `<head>` section.
- Re-ran the validator until **no HTML errors** were reported.

---

## 2️⃣ CSS Validation (W3C Jigsaw)

**Tool:** W3C CSS Validator (https://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/)  
**Screenshot:**  
![CSS Validation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/css_valid.png)

### Initial Issues

| Problem | Details |
| ------ | ------- |
| `style.css` not found | When validating via the live Heroku URL, the validator returned a `java.lang.Exception` because it could not fetch `/static/css/style.css`. |
| Vendor-specific warnings | External CSS from **Bootstrap 5.3.2** and **Font Awesome 6.5.2** generated many warnings about vendor prefixes (`-webkit-`, `-moz-`, `-o-`) and deprecated properties such as `clip`. |

### Fixes Applied

- Downloaded `static/style.css` locally and uploaded it directly to the validator instead of validating via the dynamic Heroku path.
- Cleaned up custom CSS where possible, keeping only necessary rules.
- Accepted vendor-prefixed rules and deprecation warnings coming from **third-party CDN stylesheets** (Bootstrap & Font Awesome). These are external dependencies and are **not modified** in this project.

The final validation of the **project’s own CSS** passes without critical errors.

---

## 3️⃣ JavaScript Validation (JSHint)

**Tool:** JSHint (https://jshint.com/)  
**Screenshot:**  
![JavaScript Validation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/js_valid.png)

### Initial Warnings

JSHint reported that:

- `arrow function syntax (=>) is only available in ES6`
- `const is available in ES6 (use 'esversion: 6')`

These warnings were related to modern syntax used in the script:

```js
document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
  const cards = document.querySelectorAll(".card");
  cards.forEach((card, index) => {
    setTimeout(() => card.classList.add("card-visible"), index * 100);
  });

  const scrollBtn = document.getElementById("scrollTopBtn");
  if (!scrollBtn) return;

  const toggleScrollBtn = () => {
    if (window.pageYOffset > 200) {
      scrollBtn.classList.add("show");
    } else {
      scrollBtn.classList.remove("show");
    }
  };

  window.addEventListener("scroll", toggleScrollBtn);
  toggleScrollBtn();

  scrollBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
    window.scrollTo({ top: 0, behavior: "smooth" });
  });
});
```
---

# 🚀 **Deployment Guide (Heroku)**

Steps include:


heroku login
heroku create hospital-management-web
git push heroku main
heroku run python manage.py migrate
heroku run python manage.py collectstatic --noinput


Set config vars for:

* STRIPE keys
* SECRET_KEY
* DEBUG
* ALLOWED_HOSTS

---
# 📁 File Structure

```text
hospital_management/
├── hospital/
│   ├── models.py
│   ├── forms.py
│   ├── views.py
│   ├── urls.py
│   └── templates/
│       └── hospital/
│
├── payments/
│   ├── models.py
│   ├── views.py
│   └── templates/
│       └── payments/
│
├── static/
│   ├── css/
│   ├── js/
│   └── images/
│       ├── responsive.png
│       ├── desktop.png
│       ├── tablet.png
│       ├── mobile.png
│       ├── html_validate.png
│       ├── css_valid.png
│       ├── js_valid.png
│       ├── python_PEP8_valid.png
│       ├── lighthouse_desk.jpg
│       └── lighthouse_mob.jpg
│
├── templates/
│   └── base.html
│
├── manage.py
│
└── hospitalmanagement/
    ├── settings.py
    ├── urls.py
    └── wsgi.py
```


---

# 🙏 **Credits & Attribution**

Mentors:

* **Rachel Furlong**
* **Spencer Barriball**

Tools:

* Bootstrap
* Django Docs
* Stripe Docs
* Balsamiq
* GitHub

---

# 📜 **License**

This project is licensed under the **MIT License**.

---

# 🎉 **Conclusion**

This system demonstrates:

✔ Full-stack Django development
✔ Secure user authentication
✔ Robust relational data modeling
✔ Stripe payment integration
✔ Professional UI/UX
✔ Real-world hospital workflow automation

A complete, secure, and production-ready application suitable for academic and professional use.

---

Commit message:

Add architecture, data flow, and ERD diagrams to README

README.md, after:


# 🏥 **Hospital Management System — Full Stack Django Application**

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/responsive.png" 
       alt="Hospital Management System Screenshot" width="900">
</p>

A comprehensive **Hospital Management System** built with **Django**, **Stripe Payments**, **Bootstrap**, **JavaScript**, and a **relational database** (SQLite locally, PostgreSQL on Heroku).
This platform enables **Admins**, **Doctors**, and **Patients** to securely manage appointments, records, billing, discharge summaries, and online payments.

---

# 📖 **Table of Contents**

1. [📌 Project Overview](#-project-overview)
2. [👤 User Stories](#-user-stories)
3. [🎨 UX / UI Design](#-ux--ui-design)
4. [🛠 Technologies Used](#-technologies-used)
5. [📂 System Architecture](#-system-architecture)
6. [🗄 Data Models](#-data-models)
7. [🔐 Authentication & Authorization](#-authentication--authorization)
8. [📅 App Features](#-app-features)
9. [💳 Stripe Payment Integration](#-stripe-payment-integration)
10. [🧪 Validation, Testing & Lighthouse](#-validation-testing--lighthouse)
11. [🚀 Deployment Guide (Heroku)](#-deployment-guide-heroku)
12. [📁 File Structure](#-file-structure)
13. [🙏 Credits & Attribution](#-credits--attribution)
14. [📜 License](#-license)

---

# 📌 **Project Overview**

This **Hospital Management System** modernizes hospital operations with:

✔ Multi-role access: Admin, Doctor, Patient
✔ Appointment booking + management
✔ Doctor & patient onboarding
✔ Discharge summary & billing generator
✔ Stripe-powered online payment system
✔ Mobile-first responsive UI
✔ Django ORM + secure authentication
✔ Comprehensive validations & Lighthouse testing

---

# 👤 **User Stories**

Below are the full user stories built into this system.
Each story explains the **goal**, the **action**, and the **value delivered** to the user.

---

# 🧑‍⚕️ **Admin User Stories**

As an **Admin**, I want to:

---

### 🟢 **1. Register or Approve Doctors & Patients**

So that only trusted and verified users gain access to the hospital system.

**I should be able to:**

* View all pending registration requests
* Approve, reject, or delete accounts
* Ensure secure access to sensitive data
* See account status updates instantly

---

### 📝 **2. Add & Manage Appointments**

To maintain an organized schedule and prevent double-booking.

**This includes:**

* Creating new appointments
* Approving or denying appointment requests
* Rescheduling or cancelling bookings
* Viewing all appointments in date order

---

### 🔍 **3. View & Update Doctor/Patient Records**

So that hospital data remains accurate and up to date.

**I should be able to:**

* Search for users
* Edit or delete records
* Update profile information
* View medical or administrative details

---

### 🧾 **4. Generate Bills & Discharge Summaries**

To ensure smooth billing workflows and accurate documentation.

**I can:**

* Generate final invoices
* Add doctor fees, room charges, medicine fees
* Download discharge summaries
* Store records for future reference

---

### 📊 **5. Access the Admin Dashboard**

So that I can monitor overall hospital activity.

**Dashboard shows:**

* Pending approvals
* Total appointments
* Total patients and doctors
* Latest system activity

---

### 🔒 **6. Enforce Role-Based Authentication**

To ensure that restricted pages are only accessed by authorized roles.

---

# 🩺 **Doctor User Stories**

As a **Doctor**, I want to:

---

### 📅 **1. View My Appointments**

To quickly understand the daily schedule and patient list.

**I can:**

* View appointments assigned to me
* Sort by date and time
* Check patient names, symptoms, and notes

---

### 👨‍⚕️ **2. Access Assigned Patients**

To prepare for consultations.

**I can:**

* View patient details and medical history
* Access submitted symptoms and prior treatments
* See profile images for easy identification

---

### 💊 **3. Issue Prescriptions**

To provide correct treatment.

**I can:**

* Add medication names
* Add dosage & timings
* Create downloadable notes for patients

---

### 🗂 **4. View Past Discharge Summaries**

To understand patient history for future visits.

---

### 🛡 **5. Access Only My Patients**

To maintain confidentiality and privacy.

---

# 🧑‍🦽 **Patient User Stories**

As a **Patient**, I want to:

---

### 🧾 **1. Register Easily**

So that I can securely access the system.

**I provide:**

* Basic personal details
* Contact information
* Symptoms
* Optional profile photo

---

### 📅 **2. Book Appointments**

To receive timely medical assistance.

**I can:**

* Choose a doctor
* Select appointment date
* Get confirmation instantly

---

### 🔎 **3. View Appointment History**

To keep track of all past and upcoming medical visits.

---

### 📄 **4. View Billing & Discharge Information**

To download and review all medical charges.

---

### 💬 **5. Send Feedback / Contact Form**

To reach out to the hospital for help or suggestions.


---

# 🎨 **UX / UI Design**

### UX Goals

✔ Accessible
✔ Clean & modern
✔ Mobile responsive
✔ Easy navigation

---

## 🖼 **Wireframes (GitHub Hosted)**

### 🖥 Desktop

![Desktop Wireframe](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/desktop.png)

### 📱 Tablet

![Tablet Wireframe](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/tablet.png)

### 📲 Mobile

![Mobile Wireframe](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/mobile.png)

---

# 🛠 **Technologies Used**

### **Frontend**

* HTML5
* CSS3 / Bootstrap
* JavaScript

### **Backend**

* Django
* Python
* Django ModelForms
* Django ORM

### **Database**

* SQLite (Local)
* PostgreSQL (Heroku)

### **Deployment**

* Heroku
* GitHub
* WhiteNoise
* Gunicorn

---

# 📂 **System Architecture**

```
hospital_management/
│
├── hospital/         # Main logic & models
├── payments/         # Stripe handling
├── static/           # CSS, JS, images
├── templates/        # HTML templates
└── hospitalmanagement/ # Settings + URLs
```

---

# 🗄 **Data Models**

Includes:

✔ Doctor
✔ Patient
✔ Appointment
✔ DischargeDetails
✔ Payment (Stripe)

With relationships:

* One-to-One: User ↔ Doctor, User ↔ Patient
* Many-to-One: Patient → Appointments
* One-to-Many: Patient → Discharge Summaries

## Full Data Schema (Tables + Fields)

Doctor
- user_id (OneToOne -> auth_user)
- department, mobile, address, profile_pic, status, created_at

Patient
- user_id (OneToOne -> auth_user)
- address, mobile, symptoms, profile_pic, assignedDoctorId (FK -> Doctor), status, created_at

Appointment
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- doctor_id (FK -> Doctor)
- date_time, description, status, created_at
- created_by_id, updated_by_id (FK -> auth_user)

DischargeDetails
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- doctor_id (FK -> Doctor, nullable)
- admission_date, discharge_date, summary
- room_charge, doctor_fee, medicine_cost, other_charge, total, created_at

Invoice
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- issued_date, amount, paid, created_at, created_by_id (FK -> auth_user)

Payment
- user_id (FK -> auth_user)
- patient_id (FK -> Patient)
- discharge_id (FK -> DischargeDetails, nullable)
- amount, currency, stripe_session_id, stripe_payment_intent, status, created_at

Prescription
- appointment_id (OneToOne -> Appointment)
- date_issued, medications, instructions, created_at, created_by_id (FK -> auth_user)

Feedback
- appointment_id (FK -> Appointment)
- rating, comments, submitted_at

## Text ERD (Relationships)

```
User 1--1 Doctor
User 1--1 Patient
Patient 1--* Appointment *--1 Doctor
Appointment 1--1 Prescription
Appointment 1--* Feedback
Patient 1--* DischargeDetails
DischargeDetails 1--* Payment
User 1--* Payment
Patient 1--* Invoice
```

---

# 🔐 **Authentication & Authorization**

✔ Django Auth
✔ Role-based permissions
✔ Secure session management
✔ Custom decorators for access control

---

# 📅 **App Features Overview**

### **Admin**

* Approve users
* Manage appointments
* Billing + discharge

### **Doctor**

* View appointments
* Patient access
* Add diagnosis

### **Patient**

* Book appointments
* Track visit history
* Download reports

---
## System Architecture & Design

### 1. High-Level System Architecture
![System Architecture](static/images/diagram.png)

This diagram summarizes how Admin, Doctor, and Patient roles interact with the system.
Requests flow through Django views and templates, with data persisted via the ORM into the
relational database for secure, role-aware operations.

### 2. Data Flow Diagram (DFD)
![Data Flow Diagram](static/images/data_flow.png)

The DFD illustrates how user actions such as login, appointments, and billing
travel from the UI to Django views and models, then into the database and back
to templates for rendering.

### 3. Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD)
![Entity Relationship Diagram](static/images/erd.png)

The ERD highlights the core entities (User, Patient, Doctor, Appointment, Prescription,
Invoice, AuditLog) and their relationships, reflecting how clinical and administrative
records are linked across the system.

---

# 💳 **Stripe Payment Integration**

Includes:

✔ Stripe Checkout
✔ Secure redirection
✔ Test mode supported
✔ Payment logs stored in DB

Environment vars:

```
STRIPE_PUBLISHABLE_KEY=pk_test_...
STRIPE_SECRET_KEY=sk_test_...
```

---

# 🧪 **Validation, Testing & Lighthouse**

Below is the full validation section you requested, including images stored in GitHub.

---

## ✅ **Validation Summary Table**

| Validation Type   | Tool                 | Status   | Notes                             |
| ----------------- | -------------------- | -------- | --------------------------------- |
| HTML              | W3C Validator        | ✔ Passed | Templates validated               |
| CSS               | Jigsaw CSS Validator | ✔ Passed | Bootstrap vendor warnings ignored |
| JS                | JSHint / ESLint      | ✔ Passed | ES6 validated with config         |
| Python            | pycodestyle / flake8 | ✔ Passed | Long lines noted but non-breaking |
| Django Deployment | `check --deploy`     | ✔ Passed | Safe                              |

---

## 🖼 **Validation Screenshots**

### ✅ HTML Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/html_validate.png" width="700">

### 🎨 CSS Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/css_valid.png" width="700">

### 🟨 JavaScript Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/js_valid.png" width="700">

### 🐍 Python (PEP8) Validation

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/python_PEP8_valid.png" width="700">


---

## 📱 **Responsiveness Testing**

| Device Type | Examples         | Result |
| ----------- | ---------------- | ------ |
| Mobile      | iPhone, Pixel    | ✔ Good |
| Tablet      | iPad Mini        | ✔ Good |
| Laptop      | MacBook, Surface | ✔ Good |
| Desktop     | FHD/4K           | ✔ Good |

---

## 🌐 **Browser Compatibility Testing**

| Browser | Appearance | Functionality | Responsive |
| ------- | ---------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Chrome  | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |
| Safari  | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |
| Firefox | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |
| Edge    | ✔          | ✔             | ✔          |

---

## 🧪 **Manual Testing Matrix**

| Test Case           | Expected       | Actual  | Status |
| ------------------- | -------------- | ------- | ------ |
| Login               | Redirect       | Works   | ✔      |
| Invalid Login       | Error          | Correct | ✔      |
| Booking Appointment | Saves          | Works   | ✔      |
| Approve Doctor      | Status updates | Works   | ✔      |
| Discharge Bill      | PDF            | Works   | ✔      |
| Stripe Payment      | Works          | Works   | ✔      |

---

## 🔦 **Lighthouse Scores**

| Metric         | Mobile | Desktop |
| -------------- | ------ | ------- |
| Performance    | ⭐⭐⭐⭐   | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐   |
| Accessibility  | ⭐⭐⭐⭐   | ⭐⭐⭐⭐    |
| Best Practices | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐  | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐   |
| SEO            | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐  | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐   |

### Screenshots

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/lighthouse_desk.jpg" width="700">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/lighthouse_mob.jpg" width="700">

---

# 🐞 Debugging & Issue Resolution

This project went through several rounds of debugging and validation to ensure that the **HTML**, **CSS**, **JavaScript**, and **Python** code are clean, standards-compliant, and production-ready.  
Below is a summary of the main issues encountered and how they were fixed.

---

## 1️⃣ HTML Validation (W3C Nu Validator)

**Tool:** W3C HTML Validator (https://validator.w3.org/)  
**Screenshot:**  
![HTML Validation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/html_validate.png)

### Initial Issues

| Problem | Details |
| ------ | ------- |
| Trailing slash on void elements | Validator reported that a `<link>` tag had a trailing `/` and highlighted that this can cause issues with unquoted attributes. |
| `<style>` inside `<main>` | A `<style>` tag had been placed inside a `<main>` element, causing the error: **"Element `style` not allowed as child of element `main` in this context."** |

### Fixes Applied

- Removed unnecessary trailing `/` from affected void elements where required.
- Moved all inline `<style>` blocks from page content sections (e.g. inside `<main>`) into the base templates’ `<head>` section.
- Re-ran the validator until **no HTML errors** were reported.

---

## 2️⃣ CSS Validation (W3C Jigsaw)

**Tool:** W3C CSS Validator (https://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/)  
**Screenshot:**  
![CSS Validation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/css_valid.png)

### Initial Issues

| Problem | Details |
| ------ | ------- |
| `style.css` not found | When validating via the live Heroku URL, the validator returned a `java.lang.Exception` because it could not fetch `/static/css/style.css`. |
| Vendor-specific warnings | External CSS from **Bootstrap 5.3.2** and **Font Awesome 6.5.2** generated many warnings about vendor prefixes (`-webkit-`, `-moz-`, `-o-`) and deprecated properties such as `clip`. |

### Fixes Applied

- Downloaded `static/style.css` locally and uploaded it directly to the validator instead of validating via the dynamic Heroku path.
- Cleaned up custom CSS where possible, keeping only necessary rules.
- Accepted vendor-prefixed rules and deprecation warnings coming from **third-party CDN stylesheets** (Bootstrap & Font Awesome). These are external dependencies and are **not modified** in this project.

The final validation of the **project’s own CSS** passes without critical errors.

---

## 3️⃣ JavaScript Validation (JSHint)

**Tool:** JSHint (https://jshint.com/)  
**Screenshot:**  
![JavaScript Validation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Purohit1999/hospital_management/main/static/images/js_valid.png)

### Initial Warnings

JSHint reported that:

- `arrow function syntax (=>) is only available in ES6`
- `const is available in ES6 (use 'esversion: 6')`

These warnings were related to modern syntax used in the script:

```js
document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", () => {
  const cards = document.querySelectorAll(".card");
  cards.forEach((card, index) => {
    setTimeout(() => card.classList.add("card-visible"), index * 100);
  });

  const scrollBtn = document.getElementById("scrollTopBtn");
  if (!scrollBtn) return;

  const toggleScrollBtn = () => {
    if (window.pageYOffset > 200) {
      scrollBtn.classList.add("show");
    } else {
      scrollBtn.classList.remove("show");
    }
  };

  window.addEventListener("scroll", toggleScrollBtn);
  toggleScrollBtn();

  scrollBtn.addEventListener("click", () => {
    window.scrollTo({ top: 0, behavior: "smooth" });
  });
});
```
---

# 🚀 **Deployment Guide (Heroku)**

Steps include:


heroku login
heroku create hospital-management-web
git push heroku main
heroku run python manage.py migrate
heroku run python manage.py collectstatic --noinput


Set config vars for:

* STRIPE keys
* SECRET_KEY
* DEBUG
* ALLOWED_HOSTS

---
# 📁 File Structure

```text
hospital_management/
├── hospital/
│   ├── models.py
│   ├── forms.py
│   ├── views.py
│   ├── urls.py
│   └── templates/
│       └── hospital/
│
├── payments/
│   ├── models.py
│   ├── views.py
│   └── templates/
│       └── payments/
│
├── static/
│   ├── css/
│   ├── js/
│   └── images/
│       ├── responsive.png
│       ├── desktop.png
│       ├── tablet.png
│       ├── mobile.png
│       ├── html_validate.png
│       ├── css_valid.png
│       ├── js_valid.png
│       ├── python_PEP8_valid.png
│       ├── lighthouse_desk.jpg
│       └── lighthouse_mob.jpg
│
├── templates/
│   └── base.html
│
├── manage.py
│
└── hospitalmanagement/
    ├── settings.py
    ├── urls.py
    └── wsgi.py
```


---

# 🙏 **Credits & Attribution**

Mentors:

* **Rachel Furlong**
* **Spencer Barriball**

Tools:

* Bootstrap
* Django Docs
* Stripe Docs
* Balsamiq
* GitHub

---

# 📜 **License**

This project is licensed under the **MIT License**.

---

# 🎉 **Conclusion**

This system demonstrates:

✔ Full-stack Django development
✔ Secure user authentication
✔ Robust relational data modeling
✔ Stripe payment integration
✔ Professional UI/UX
✔ Real-world hospital workflow automation

A complete, secure, and production-ready application suitable for academic and professional use.

---
